---
title: "Smart is not a thing and why anyone can learn to program computers"
date: 2016-01- 12:17 UTC
tags:
author: Justin Pease
layout: post
---

 If you tie a baby elephant to a tree, it will learn that it can not move away from the tree.  After some time, the correlation between being tied and not being able to move becomes so strong, that if tied up as a full grown elephant to a small easily movable object, it will not even try to move away.  Now, I don't raise elephants so I can't say that I have witnessed this first hand, but I do believe, that the same behavior could be witnessed among our own kind; that we ourselves, once "tied up,”  tend to see constraints where there may not be any at all.  
 
So what does it mean to say "Smart is not a thing?"

	You have heard and probably have said, "that guy is so smart!" or, "boy is she smart."  All around us we know people who can do some really incredible things and we like to give them a label; talented, smart, creative etc.  While I think there may be some accuracy in what we are trying to convey, when we use these words to describe others, I think there are constraints that come along with it.  
	
	
First we need look at what is inherent talent vs learned or earned ability. When we label someone or their actions as “smart," our default understanding is to believe that ability is “just something they can do;" as if they have a natural or magic ability that allows them to do something smarter.  For example, if someone is good at writing, we often assume that they have an inherent ability to express ideas with words in a creative and engaging way. Most of the time our understanding stops there and we are content to label that person as smart. The fall back is that when we assume someone’s ability to write well is their inherent capability, we discount their work that went into crafting their skill.  But, it’s really interesting to learn that some of the most successful people in the world struggled in the beginning of their craft.  Michael Jordan was cut from his high school basketball team. Walt Disney was fired from the Kansas City Star because his editor felt he "lacked imagination and had no good ideas."  Steven Spielberg was rejected by the University of Southern California School of Cinematic Arts multiple times. Thomas Edison's teachers told him he was "too stupid to learn anything."
	
	Thomas Edison acquired a record number of 1,093 patents and invented the lightbulb.  His success in multiple fields was astounding.  But most people don't know that it took him roughly 1,000 failed attempts at making a light bulb before he made one that worked. The truth is, that most of the success we see in someone is the result of very hard work and effort over a long period of time. Only then did they craft their difficult skill. We see people doing things well and so often assume they are “smart."  
	
	The second problem created by labeling someone as “smart" is the issue of comparison.  We love to compare.  Comparing things gives us context for understanding.  A person who is 5'8 is only able to accept the label of short when compared to someone taller than that.  Labeling anything, including ourselves or someone else immediately creates that comparison and context.  So sometimes, when we label another as smart, we are suggesting that they are smarter than us.  This is dangerous. Do not put yourself in a box, do not tie yourself up to that tree by believing you are not as smart. If we believe this, we will not reach our own potential. Someone who is 5’11 can work very very hard to become 6’2 but it will never happen. Our minds on the other hand are not static. Your brain can change, grow, adapt, and learn. You can develop new skills and over time craft them into abilities that are very impressive but only if you believe that you can.  

While perseverance is really a topic for another blog post, one of my favorite quotes sums up the importance of what I am suggesting:  “Nothing in this world can take the place of persistence. Talent will not; nothing is more common than unsuccessful people with talent. Genius will not; unrewarded genius is almost a proverb. Education will not; the world is full of educated derelicts. Persistence and determination alone are omnipotent. The slogan “press on” has solved and always will solve the problems of the human race.” ~  Calvin Coolidge

As a student at Turing School of Software and Design I met a professor who quickly became one of my favorite people.  Josh Cheek.  He introduced me to the idea that “smart is not a thing”.  Funny enough, if you spend time working with Josh, your first inclination is to say how ’smart’ he is.  Most people know Josh as a little bit of a "mad scientist."  He can do things with computers that make most of our heads spin. The things we typically call “black magic," he understands or has a decent shot of figuring out.  Yet, one of the most interesting things I have learned about Josh is how much he struggled in the beginning.  People assume that his amazing ability to understand and write code is a function of him just being “smart”.  More accurately as he has explained to me, it was a function of a lot of hard work, and learning how to approach things from the right angles.  Learning how to learn in efficient ways.  Learning how to solve unknown challenges effectively; a lot of struggles along with trial and error. I believe this has much more leverage over a person’s success than his or her innate ability. Josh also has a passion for helping others and especially the students who are struggling in the beginning.  He is soon leaving us to go instruct at a school in Chicago for veterans.  He wants to help people understand that they too can learn to become incredible programmers (or just about anything they want to become) but they first need to untie themselves from the tree and believe they are capable.   

I had no experience with programming at all when I came to this school.  I really struggled to learn this new skill set of computer programming.  I repeated the first 6 week section of the school and I took time off after the second to catch up on the information we were learning. I went from not understanding how a simple enumerable worked, to consuming API’s and building fully functional web apps. (Shameless plug for employers reading this). I didn’t give up, I persevered. Turing is an absolute top notch education.  The staff, curriculum, students, environment, duration, immersion, and the entire experience are, in my opinion, unmatched in the entire development community nationwide.  It’s also a very tough 7 months of 80 plus hours a week.  But if I didn’t believe I could have done it I would have quit a long time ago.  I believed that I could learn program and I'm thankful to people like Josh who helped reinforce that belief.  

If you want to try something new; do it.  If you are interesting in learning something new; do it.  Don't let yourself or anyone else tell you your not “smart” enough or chain you to a tree.

Justin Pease
